Although acceptable in small biopsies, a designation of non-small cell lung carcinoma, not otherwise specified (NSCLC, NOS), is not acceptable in resection specimens. 

Lung carcinomas should be adequately sampled in order to ensure defining features are satisfactorily represented in the sections examined histologically and the presence or absence of invasion can be thoroughly assessed. The WHO defines invasion in adenocarcinoma as: (1) any histologic subtype other than a lepidic pattern (ie, acinar, papillary, micropapillary, and/or solid), (2) tumor cells infiltrating myofibroblastic stroma, (3) vascular or pleural invasion, or (4) spread through air spaces (STAS).1 

STAS is a recently described concept which is defined as micropapillary clusters, solid nests or single cells of tumor extending beyond the edge of the tumor into the air spaces of the surrounding lung parenchyma. Initial studies have shown that the presence of STAS is associated with an increased incidence of recurrence in tumors that have undergone limited resection (eg, segmentectomy, wedge resection).1 At the present time, STAS should not be incorporated into the measurement of tumor size (see Note A).1

For cases in which a diagnosis of AIS or MIA is being considered, the lesion must be entirely submitted for histopathologic examination. A diagnosis of MIA is applied to a lepidic-predominant tumor ≤3 cm in size with an invasive component measuring ≤0.5 cm provided it does not exhibit any of the following: (1) tumor invades lymphatics, blood vessels or pleura, (2) tumor necrosis is present, (3) STAS is present.8 Tumors ≤3 cm with ≤0.5 cm of invasion exhibiting 1 or more of these exclusionary features are classified as lepidic-predominant adenocarcinoma. A diagnosis of AIS or MIA should only be made on solitary lesions ≤3 cm in diameter. Specimens showing only AIS are categorized as Tis (AIS). MIA is classified as T1mi.2

For the uncommon occurrence of a lepidic-predominant tumor >3.0 cm with either no invasion or ≤0.5 cm of invasion, it is recommended that such tumors be classified as lepidic-predominant adenocarcinoma and staged as pT1a, as there is insufficient data to conclude they have the same prognostic features as ≤3.0 cm tumors meeting criteria for AIS or MIA.6
 
Classification of adenocarcinomas by predominant histologic pattern can be useful for assessing pathologic grade. The WHO recommends classifying invasive nonmucinous adenocarcinomas according to the predominant subtype and specifying non-predominant subtypes semi-quantitatively in 5% increments.1 In poorly differentiated cases, immunohistochemistry can greatly aid in classification. This is particularly useful in making a diagnosis of solid-type adenocarcinoma or nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. 