Presurgical or neoadjuvant treatment code is found in Procedure.code, and the treatment effect in breast is found in Procedure.outcome.

Patients may be treated with endocrine therapy or chemotherapy before surgical excision (termed presurgical or neoadjuvant therapy). The response of the invasive carcinoma to therapy is a strong prognostic factor for disease-free and overall survival. Special attention to finding and evaluating the tumor bed is necessary for these specimens.1-3

Numerous classification systems have been developed to evaluate response.1,2 Institutions or treatment protocols may require evaluation by one of these systems. The AJCC stage after treatment is also associated with prognosis. T and N categories determined after treatment are indicated by the prefix “yp.”

Invasive carcinomas with a minor response may show little or no change in size. With greater degrees of response, the carcinoma shows decreased cellularity and may be present as multiple foci of invasion scattered over a larger tumor bed. The post-neoadjuvant therapy pathologic T-category (ypT) is based on the largest single focus of residual tumor, if present. Treatment-related fibrosis adjacent to residual invasive carcinoma is not included in the ypT maximum dimension. The “m” modifier is used to indicate that multiple foci of invasive carcinoma are present. The inclusion of additional information, such as the distance over which invasive carcinoma is present, the number of foci of invasive carcinoma, or the number of slides or blocks with invasive carcinoma, may be helpful in estimating the extent of residual disease. If no residual invasive carcinoma is present in the breast, the case summary can be used to report residual DCIS and/or metastatic carcinoma in lymph nodes. If there is no residual carcinoma in the breast or in the lymph nodes, then a CAP protocol case summary need not be used for reporting. Cases with no residual invasive carcinoma after neoadjuvant therapy are categorized as ypTis if there is residual DCIS or ypT0 if there is no residual cancer (not ypTX). Cases categorized as M1 before neoadjuvant therapy stay that way (ie, they remain Stage IV even if there is complete pathologic response).

Most carcinomas are of the same grade after treatment. In a few cases, the grade will be higher because of marked nuclear pleomorphism. In very rare cases, the carcinoma will be of lower grade. The prognostic significance of a change in grade after treatment has not been determined.

If negative prior to treatment, it is recommended that ER, PgR, and HER2 be repeated on invasive carcinomas after treatment, as significant changes may occur in a subset of carcinomas, sometimes due to tumor heterogeneity and limited sampling prior to treatment.
