It is recommended that small vessel vascular invasion should be reported separately from venous (large vessel) invasion. Small vessel invasion indicates tumor involvement of thin-walled structures lined by endothelium, without an identifiable smooth muscle layer or elastic lamina. Small vessels include lymphatics, capillaries, and postcapillary venules. Small vessel invasion is associated with lymph node metastasis and has been shown to be independent indicator of adverse outcome in several studies.1, 2 The higher prognostic significance of extramural small vessel invasion has been suggested,3 but the importance of anatomic location in small vessel invasion (extramural or intramural) is not well defined.  

Tumor involving endothelium-lined spaces with an identifiable smooth muscle layer or elastic lamina is considered venous (large vessel) invasion. Circumscribed tumor nodules surrounded by an elastic lamina on hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) or elastic stain are also considered venous invasion. Venous invasion can be extramural (beyond muscularis propria) or intramural (submucosa or muscularis propria). Extramural venous invasion has been demonstrated by multivariate analysis to be an independent adverse prognostic factor in multiple studies and is a risk factor for liver metastasis.3 The significance of intramural venous invasion is less clear. Histologic features like tumor deposits adjacent to arteries(“orphan artery” sign) and elongated tumor nodules extending into pericolic fat from the muscularis propria (“protruding tongue” sign) can raise the suspicion for venous invasion.4 Elastic stain can lead to 2- to 3-fold increase in the detection of venous invasion, and may be used to improve assessment of this feature.5

Perineural invasion has been shown to be independent indicator of poor prognosis.6-8 While some series did not find perineural invasion to be a significant predictive factor in stage II disease,9, 10 many studies have confirmed its adverse effect on survival in stage II disease.2, 11 Extramural perineural invasion may have a greater adverse prognostic effect,7 but the distinction between intramural and extramural perineural invasion has not been well studied.