All grossly negative or equivocal lymph nodes should be submitted entirely. Grossly positive lymph nodes may be partially submitted for microscopic confirmation of metastasis.

The accuracy and predictive value of stage II assignment are directly proportional to the thoroughness of the surgical technique in removing all regional nodes and the pathologic examination of the resection specimen in identifying and harvesting all regional lymph nodes for microscopic assessment. The National Quality Forum lists the presence of at least 12 lymph nodes in a surgical resection among the key quality measures for colon cancer care in the United States (see http://www.facs.org/cancer/qualitymeasures.html). 

The likelihood of detecting metastasis increases with the number of lymph nodes examined; hence 12 lymph nodes should be considered the minimum target, but all possible lymph nodes should be retrieved and examined.7, 8 

The clinical outcome is linked to lymph node harvest in stage II disease, 9 indicating a positive effect of optimal mesenteric resection by the surgeon, optimal lymph node harvest from the resection specimen by the pathologist, or both.  

The number of lymph nodes recovered from a resection specimen is dependent on several factors. Surgical technique, surgery volume, and patient factors (eg, age and anatomic variation) alter the actual number of nodes in a resection specimen, but the diligence and skill of the pathologist in identifying and harvesting lymph nodes in the resection specimen also are major factors. Lymph nodes may be more difficult to identify in specimens from patients who are obese10 or elderly, or after neoadjuvant therapy.11 Because it has been shown that nodal metastasis in colorectal cancer is often found in small lymph nodes (<5 mm in diameter), diligent search for lymph nodes is required on gross examination of resection specimens.  If fewer than 12 lymph nodes are found, re-examining the specimen for additional lymph nodes, with or without visual enhancement techniques, should be considered. The pathology report should clearly state the total number of lymph nodes examined and the total number involved by metastases. Data are insufficient to recommend routine use of tissue levels or special/ancillary techniques.
