Detection of defective mismatch repair in colorectal carcinomas is important for detection of Lynch syndrome (hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer syndrome [HNPCC]), which accounts for approximately 2% to 3% of all colorectal carcinomas and has clinical implications for treatment of the affected patient and family members.  Microsatellite instability (MSI) testing can be used to cost-effectively screen colorectal cancer patients for possible Lynch syndrome.  Patients with a microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) phenotype that indicates mismatch repair deficiency in their cancer may have a germline mutation in one of several DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes (eg, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, or PMS2) or an altered EPCAM (TACSTD1) gene.  After appropriate genetic counseling, patients may want to consider testing to identify the causative heritable abnormality.  An MSI-H phenotype is more frequently observed in sporadic colorectal cancer (about 15% of cases) due to somatic abnormalities, usually hypermethylation of the MLH1 gene promoter.  The specificity of MSI testing can be increased by using it primarily on at-risk populations, such as colorectal cancer patients younger than 50 years, or patients with a strong family history of Lynch-associated tumors (eg, colorectal, endometrial, gastric, or upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma),1 but with sacrifice of sensitivity, since a sizeable minority of cases lacks these clinical characteristics.

MSI testing of tumor DNA is generally performed with at least 5 microsatellite markers, generally mononucleotide or dinucleotide repeat markers.  In 1998, a National Institutes of Health consensus panel proposed that laboratories use a 5-marker panel consisting of 3 dinucleotide and 2 mononucleotide repeats for MSI testing. Recent data suggests that dinucleotide repeats may have lower sensitivity and specificity for identifying tumors with an MSI-H phenotype.  As a consequence, there has been a move towards including more mononucleotides and fewer dinucleotides in MSI testing panels. Many laboratories now use a commercially available kit for MSI testing that utilizes 5 mononucleotide markers.

MSI testing is frequently done in conjunction with immunohistochemical (IHC) testing for DNA MMR protein expression (ie, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS expression). If DNA MMR IHC has not been performed, this testing should be recommended for any case that shows an MSI-H phenotype, because this information will help identify the gene that is most likely to have a germline mutation (eg, a patient whose tumor shows loss of MSH2 and MSH6 expression, but retention of MLH1 and PMS2 expression, is likely to have an MSH2 germline mutation). If the results of DNA MMR IHC and MSI testing are discordant (eg, MSI-H phenotype with normal IHC or abnormal IHC with MSS phenotype), then the laboratory should make sure that the same sample was used for MSI and IHC testing and that there was no sample mix-up. However, MSI-H may not occur in colorectal cancers of patients with germline MSH6 mutation. Intact expression of all 4 proteins indicates that MMR enzymes tested are intact but does not entirely exclude Lynch syndrome, as approximately 5% of families may have a missense mutation (especially in MLH1) that can lead to a nonfunctional protein with retained antigenicity. Defects in lesser-known MMR enzymes may also lead to a similar result, but this situation is rare.

Any positive reaction in the nuclei of tumor cells is considered as intact expression (normal), and it is common for intact staining to be somewhat patchy. An interpretation of expression loss in tumor cells should be made only if a positive reaction is seen in internal control cells, such as the nuclei of stromal, inflammatory, or nonneoplastic epithelial cells. Loss of expression of MLH1 may be due to Lynch syndrome or methylation of the MLH1 promoter region (as occurs in sporadic MSI colorectal carcinoma). Genetic testing is ultimately required for this distinction, although a specific BRAF gene mutation (V600E) is present in many sporadic cases, but not familial cancers. Loss of MSH2 expression strongly suggests Lynch syndrome. PMS2 loss is often associated with loss of MLH1 and is only independently meaningful if MLH1 is intact. MSH6 is similarly related to MSH2.  One should also keep in mind that nucleolar staining or complete loss of MSH6 staining has been described in colorectal cancer cases with prior radiation or chemotherapy and a significant reduction of MSH6 staining has been described in a small percentage of colorectal carcinomas with somatic mutations of the coding region microsatellites of the MSH6 gene in MLH1/PMS2-deficient carcinomas.
